<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
      
      <title>HomerOdysseyFaglesTranslation</title>
      
      
      
      
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="./CSS/Homer.css"></link>
      <meta charset="UTF-8"></meta>
      <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" initial-scale="1.0"></meta>
   </head>
   
   <body>
      
      
      <div>
         
         <h2>Book I <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a> Inspires the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Prince</a></h2>
         
         <p>Sing to me of the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">man</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers004">Muse</a>, the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">man</a> of twists and turns ...</p> 
         
         <p>driven time and again off course, once <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">he</a> had plundered</p> 
         
         <p>the hallowed heights of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place001">Troy</a>.</p>
         
         <p>Many cities of men <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">he</a> saw and learned their minds,</p>
         
         <p>many pains <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">he</a> suffered, heartsick on the open sea,</p>
         
         <p>fighting to save <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">his</a> life and bring <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">his</a> comrades home.</p>
         
         <p>But <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">he</a> could not save them from disaster, hard as <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">he</a> strove—</p> 
         
         <p>the recklessness of their own ways destroyed them all,</p>
         
         <p>the blind fools, they devoured the cattle of the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers005">Sun</a></p>
         
         <p>and the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers005">Sungod</a> blotted out the day of their return.</p>
         
         <p>Launch out on <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">his</a> story, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers004">Muse</a>, daughter of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a>,</p>
         
         <p>start from where <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers004">you</a> will—sing for our time too.</p>
         
         <p>By now, all the survivors, all who avoided headlong death</p>
         
         <p>were safe at home, escaped the wars and waves.</p>    
         
         <p>But one <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">man</a> alone ...</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">his</a> heart set on <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">his</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">wife</a> and <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">his</a> return— <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers008">Calypso</a>,</p>
         
         <p>the bewitching nymph, the lustrous goddess, held him back,</p> 
         
         <p>deep in her arching caverns, craving him for a husband.</p>
         
         <p>But then, when the wheeling seasons brought the year around,</p> 
         
         <p>that year spun out by the gods when he should reach his home,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a>—though not even there would he be free of trials,</p>
         
         <p>even among his loved ones—then every god took pity,</p>
         
         <p>all except <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">Poseidon</a>. He raged on, seething against</p>
         
         <p>the great <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> till he reached his <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">native land</a>.</p>
         
         <p>But now Poseidon had gone to visit the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org003">Ethiopians</a> worlds away,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org003">Ethiopians</a> off at the farthest limits of mankind,</p>
         
         <p>a people split in two, one part where the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers005">Sungod</a> sets</p>
         
         <p>and part where the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers005">Sungod</a> rises. There <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">Poseidon</a> went</p>
         
         <p>to receive an offering, bulls and rams by the hundred—</p> 
         
         <p>far away at the feast the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">Sea-lord</a> sat and took his pleasure.</p>
         
         <p>But the other gods, at home in <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">Olympian<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus’s</a></a> halls,</p>
         
         <p>met for full assembly there, and among them now</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">the father of men and gods</a> was first to speak,</p>
         
         <p>sorely troubled, remembering handsome <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers011">Aegisthus</a>,</p>
         
         <p>the man <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers013"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers012">Agamemnon</a>’s son</a>, renowned <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers013">Orestes</a>, killed.</p>
         
         <p>Recalling <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers011">Aegisthus</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a> harangued the immortal powers:</p>
         
         <p>“Ah how shameless—the way these mortals blame the gods.</p>
         
         <p>From us alone, they say, come all their miseries, yes,</p>
         
         <p>but they themselves, with their own reckless ways,</p>
         
         <p>compound their pains beyond their proper share.</p>
         
         <p>Look at <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers011">Aegisthus</a> now ...</p>
         
         <p>above and beyond his share he stole <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers014"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers012">Atrides</a>’ wife</a>,</p>
         
         <p>he murdered <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers012">the warlord</a> coming home from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place001">Troy</a></p>
         <p>though he knew it meant his own total ruin.</p>
         
         <p>Far in advance we told <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers011">him</a> so ourselves,</p>
         
         <p>dispatching the guide, the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers015">giant-killer</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers015">Hermes</a>.</p>
         
         <p>‘Don’t murder <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers012">the man</a>,’ <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers015">he</a> said, ‘don’t court <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers014">his wife</a>.</p>
         
         <p>Beware, revenge will come from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers013">Orestes</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers013"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers012">Agamemnon</a>’s son</a>,</p>
         
         <p>that day he comes of age and longs for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place003">his native land</a>.’</p>
         
         <p>So <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers015">Hermes</a> warned, with all the good will in the world,</p>
         
         <p>but would <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers011">Aegisthus</a>’ hardened heart give way? </p>
         
         <p>Now he pays the price—all at a single stroke.”</p>
         
         <p>And <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">sparkling-eyed</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a> drove the matter home:</p>
         
         <p>“<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Father</a>, son of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers016">Cronus</a>, our high and mighty king,</p>
         
         <p>surely <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers011">he</a> goes down to a death he earned in full!</p>
         
         <p>Let them all die so, all who do such things.</p>
         
         <p>But my heart breaks for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>,</p>
         
         <p>that <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">seasoned veteran cursed by fate</a> so long—</p>
         
         <p>far from his loved ones still, he suffers torments</p>
         
         <p>off on a <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place004">wave-washed island</a> rising at the center of the seas.</p>
         
         <p>A dark wooded island, and there a <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers008">goddess</a> makes her home,</p>
         
         <p>daughter of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers017">Atlas</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers017">wicked Titan who sounds the deep</a></p>
         
         <p>in all its depths, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers017">whose shoulders lift on high</a></p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers017">the colossal pillars thrusting earth and sky apart</a>.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers008"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers017">Atlas</a>’ daughter</a> it is who holds <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> captive,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">luckless man</a>—despite his tears, forever trying</p>
         
         <p>to spellbind his heart with suave, seductive words</p>
         
         <p>and wipe all thought of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a> from his mind.</p>
         
         <p>But he, straining for no more than a glimpse</p>
         
         <p>of hearth-smoke drifting up from his own land,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> longs to die ...</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Olympian <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a></a>, have you no care for him in your lofty heart?</p>
         
         <p>Did he never win your favor with sacrifices</p>
         
         <p>burned beside the ships on the broad plain of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place001">Troy</a>?</p>
         
         <p>Why, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a>, why so dead set against <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>?”</p>
         
         <p>“<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">My child</a>,” <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">who marshals the thunderheads</a> replied,</p>
         
         <p>“what nonsense you let slip through your teeth. Now,</p>
         
         <p>how on earth could I forget <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>? Great <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a></p>
         
         <p>who excels all men in wisdom, excels in offerings too</p>
         
         <p>he gives the immortal gods who rule the vaulting skies?</p>
         
         <p>No, it’s the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">Earth-Shaker</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">Poseidon</a>, unappeased,</p>
         
         <p>forever fuming against him for the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers018">Cyclops</a></p>
         
         <p>whose giant eye he blinded: <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers018">godlike <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers018">Polyphemus</a></a>,</p>
         
         <p>towering over all the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org004">Cyclops</a>’ clans in power.</p>
         
         <p>The nymph <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers019">Thoosa</a> bore him, daughter of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers020">Phorcys</a>,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers020">lord of the barren salt sea</a>—<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers019">she</a> met <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">Poseidon</a></p>
         
         <p>once in his vaulted caves and they made love.</p>
         
         <p>And now for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">his <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers018">blinded son</a> the earthquake god</a>—</p>
         
         <p>though <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">he</a> won’t quite kill <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>—</p>
         
         <p>drives him far off course from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">native land</a>.</p>
         
         <p>But come, all of us here put heads together now,</p>
         
         <p>work out his journey home so <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> can return.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">Lord <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers009">Poseidon</a></a>, I trust, will let his anger go.</p>
         
         <p>How can he stand his ground against the will</p>
         
         <p>of all the gods at once—one god alone?”</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a>, her eyes flashing bright, exulted,</p>
         
         <p>“<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Father</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">son of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers016">Cronus</a></a>, our high and mighty king!</p>
         
         <p>If now it really pleases the blissful gods</p>
         
         <p>that <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">wise <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a></a> shall return—home at last—</p>
         
         <p>let us dispatch the guide and <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers015">giant-killer</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers015">Hermes</a></p>
         
         <p>down to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place004">Ogygia Island</a>, down to announce at once</p>
         
         <p>to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers008">the nymph with lovely braids</a> our fixed decree:</p> 
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> journeys home—the exile must return!</p>
         
         <p>While I myself go down to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a>, rouse his <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">son</a></p>
         
         <p>to a braver pitch, inspire his heart with courage</p>
         
         <p>to summon the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">flowing-haired <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org005">Achaeans</a></a> to full assembly,</p>
         
         <p>speak his mind to all those <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">suitors</a>, slaughtering on and on</p>
         
         <p>his droves of sheep and shambling longhorn cattle.</p>
         
         <p>Next I will send him off to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place005">Sparta</a> and sandy <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place006">Pylos</a>,</p>
         
         <p>there to learn of his <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">dear father’s</a> journey home.</p>
         
         <p>Perhaps he will hear some news and make his name</p>
         
         <p>throughout the mortal world.”</p>
         
         <p>So <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a> vowed and under her feet she fastened the supple sandals,</p>
         
         <p>ever-glowing gold, that wing her over the waves</p>
         
         <p>and boundless earth with the rush of gusting winds.</p>
         
         <p>She seized the rugged spear tipped with a bronze point—</p>
         
         <p>weighted, heavy, the massive shaft she wields to break the lines</p>
         
         <p>of heroes <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">the mighty Father’s daughter</a> storms against.</p>
         
         <p>And down she swept from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place007">Olympus</a>’ craggy peaks</p>
         
         <p>and lit on <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a>, standing tall at <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>’ gates,</p>
         
         <p>the threshold of his court. Gripping her bronze spear,</p>
         
         <p>she looked for all the world like a stranger now,</p>
         
         <p>like <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers021">Mentes</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers021">lord of the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org001">Taphians</a></a>.</p>
         
         <p>There she found the swaggering <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">suitors</a>, just then </p>
         
         <p>amusing themselves with rolling dice before the doors,</p>
         
         <p>lounging on hides of oxen they had killed themselves. </p>
         
         <p>While <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org006">heralds</a> and brisk <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org007">attendants</a> bustled round them,</p>
         
         <p>some at the mixing-bowls, mulling wine and water,</p>
         
         <p>others wiping the tables down with sopping sponges,</p>
         
         <p>setting them out in place, still other servants</p>
         
         <p>jointed and carved the great sides of meat.</p>
         
         <p>First by far to see her was <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Prince <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a></a>,</p>
         
         <p>sitting among the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">suitors</a>, heart obsessed with grief.</p>
         
         <p>He could almost see his magnificent <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">father</a>, here ...</p>
         
         <p>in the mind’s eye—if only he might drop from the clouds</p>
         
         <p>and drive these <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">suitors</a> all in a rout throughout the halls</p>
         
         <p>and regain his pride of place and rule his own domains!</p>
         
         <p>Daydreaming so as he sat among the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">suitors</a>,</p>
         
         <p>he glimpsed <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a> now</p>
         
         <p>and straight to the porch he went, mortified</p>
         
         <p>that a guest might still be standing at the doors.</p>
         
         <p>Pausing beside her there, he clasped her right hand</p>
         
         <p>and relieving her at once of her long bronze spear,</p>
         
         <p>met her with winged words: “Greetings, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">stranger</a>!</p>
         
         <p>Here in our house you’ll find a royal welcome.</p>
         
         <p>Have supper first, then tell us what you need.”</p>
         
         <p>He led the way and <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Pallas Athena</a> followed.</p>
         
         <p>Once in the high-roofed hall, he took her lance</p>
         
         <p>and fixed it firm in a burnished rack against</p>
         
         <p>a sturdy pillar, there where row on row of spears,</p> 
         
         <p>embattled <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>’ spears, stood stacked and waiting.</p>
         
         <p>Then <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">he</a> escorted her to a high, elaborate chair of honor,</p>
         
         <p>over it draped a cloth, and here he placed <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">his guest</a></p>
         
         <p>with a stool to rest her feet. But for himself</p>
         
         <p>he drew up a low reclining chair beside her,</p>
         
         <p>richly painted, clear of the press of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">suitors</a>,</p>
         
         <p>concerned his guest, offended by their uproar,</p>
         
         <p>might shrink from food in the midst of such a mob.</p>
         
         <p>He hoped, what’s more, to ask him about <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">his long-lost father</a>.</p>
         
         <p>A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher</p>
         
         <p>and over a silver basin tipped it out</p>
         
         <p>so they might rinse their hands,</p>
         
         <p>then pulled a gleaming table to their side.</p>
         
         <p>A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve them,</p>
         
         <p>appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty.</p>
         
         <p>A carver lifted platters of meat toward them,</p>
         
         <p>meats of every sort, and set beside them golden cups</p>
         
         <p>and time and again a page came round and poured them wine.</p>
         
         <p>But now the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">suitors</a> trooped in with all their swagger</p>
         
         <p>and took their seats on low and high-backed chairs.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org006">Heralds</a> poured water over their hands for rinsing,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org008">serving maids</a> brought bread heaped high in trays</p>
         
         <p>and <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org007">the young men</a> brimmed the mixing-bowls with wine.</p>
         
         <p>They reached out for the good things that lay at hand,</p>
         
         <p>and when they’d put aside desire for food and drink</p>
         
         <p>the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">suitors</a> set their minds on other pleasures,</p>
         
         <p>song and dancing, all that crowns a feast.</p>
         
         <p>A herald placed an ornate lyre in <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">Phemius</a>’ hands,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">the bard</a> who always performed among them there;</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml">they</a> forced the man to sing.</p>
         
         <p>A rippling prelude— and no sooner had he struck up his rousing song</p>
         
         <p>than <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a>, head close to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a>’s sparkling eyes,</p>
         
         <p>spoke low to his guest so no one else could hear:</p>
         
         <p>“Dear <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">stranger</a>, would you be shocked by what I say?</p>
         
         <p>Look at <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">them</a> over there. Not a care in the world,</p>
         
         <p>just lyres and tunes! Easy for them, all right,</p>
         
         <p>they feed on another’s goods and go scot-free—</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">a man whose white bones lie strewn in the rain somewhere</a>,</p>
         
         <p>rotting away on land or rolling down the ocean’s salty swells.</p>
         
         <p>But that man—if they caught sight of him home in <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a>,</p>
         
         <p>by god, they’d all pray to be faster on their feet</p>
         
         <p>than richer in bars of gold and heavy robes.</p>
         
         <p>But now, no use, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">he’s</a> died a wretched death.</p>
         
         <p>No comfort’s left for us ... not even if</p>
         
         <p>someone, somewhere, says he’s coming home.</p>
         
         <p>The day of his return will never dawn.</p>
         
         <p>Enough. Tell me about yourself now, clearly, point by point.</p>
         
         <p>Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents?</p>
         
         <p>What sort of vessel brought you? Why did the sailors</p>
         
         <p>land you here in <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a>? Who did they say they are?</p>
         
         <p>I hardly think you came this way on foot!</p>
         
         <p>And tell me this for a fact—I need to know—</p>
         
         <p>is this your first time here? Or are you a friend of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">father’s</a>,</p>
         
         <p>a guest from the old days? Once, crowds of other men </p>
         
         <p>would come to our house on visits—visitor that he was, </p>
         
         <p>when he walked among the living.”</p>
         
         <p>Her eyes glinting, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">goddess Athena</a> answered, “My whole story, of course,</p>
         
         <p>I’ll tell it point by point. Wise old <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers023">Anchialus</a></p>
         
         <p>was my father. My own name is <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers021">Mentes</a>,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers021">lord of the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org001">Taphian</a> men who love their oars</a>.</p>
         
         <p>And here <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">I’ve</a> come, just now, with ship and crew,</p>
         
         <p>sailing the wine-dark sea to foreign ports of call,</p>
         
         <p>to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place008">Temese</a>, out for bronze—our cargo gleaming iron.</p>
         
         <p>Our ship lies moored off farmlands far from town,</p>
         
         <p>riding in <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place009">Rithron Cove</a>, beneath <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place010">Mount Nion</a>’s woods.</p>
         
         <p>As for the ties between <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">your father</a> and <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">myself</a>,</p>
         
         <p>we’ve been friends forever, I’m proud to say,</p>
         
         <p>and he would bear me out</p>
         
         <p>if you went and questioned <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers024">old lord</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers024">Laertes</a>.</p>
         
         <p>He, I gather, no longer ventures into town</p>
         
         <p>but lives a life of hardship, all to himself,</p>
         
         <p>off on his farmstead with an aged serving-woman</p>
         
         <p>who tends him well, who gives him food and drink</p>
         
         <p>when weariness has taken hold of his withered limbs</p> 
         
         <p>from hauling himself along his vineyard’s steep slopes.</p>
         
         <p>And now I’ve come—and why? I heard that <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">he</a> was back ...</p>
         
         <p>your father, that is. But no, the gods thwart his passage.</p>
         
         <p>Yet I tell you great <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> is not dead. He’s still alive,</p>
         
         <p>somewhere in this wide world, held captive, out at sea </p>
         
         <p>on a wave-washed island, and hard men, savages,</p>
         
         <p>somehow hold him back against his will.</p>
         
         <p>Wait, I’ll make you a prophecy, one the immortal gods</p>
         
         <p>have planted in my mind—it will come true, I think,</p>
         
         <p>though I’m hardly a seer or know the flights of birds.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">He</a> won’t be gone long from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">the native land he loves</a>,</p>
         
         <p>not even if iron shackles bind your father down.</p>
         
         <p>He’s plotting a way to journey home at last;</p>
         
         <p>he’s never at a loss.</p>
         
         <p>But come, please, tell me about yourself now, point by point.</p>
         
         <p>You’re truly <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>’ son? You’ve sprung up so!</p>
         
         <p>Uncanny resemblance ... the head, and the fine eyes—</p>
         
         <p>I see him now. How often we used to meet in the old days</p>
         
         <p>before he embarked for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place001">Troy</a>, where <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org009">other Argive captains</a>,</p>
         
         <p>all the best men, sailed in the long curved ships.</p>
         
         <p>From then to this very day</p>
         
         <p>I’ve not set eyes on <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> or he on me.”</p>
         
         <p>And young <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a> cautiously replied,</p>
         
         <p>“I’ll try, my friend, to give you a frank answer.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">Mother</a> has always told me I’m his son, it’s true,</p>
         
         <p>but I am not so certain. Who, on his own,</p>
         
         <p>has ever really known who gave him life?</p>
         
         <p>Would to god I’d been the son of a happy man</p>
         
         <p>whom old age overtook in the midst of his possessions!</p>
         
         <p>Now, think of the most unlucky mortal ever born—</p>
         
         <p>since you ask me, yes, they say I am his son.”</p>
         
         <p>“Still,” <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">the clear-eyed goddess</a> reassured him,</p>
         
         <p>“trust me, the gods have not marked out your house</p>
         
         <p>for such an unsung future,</p>
         
         <p>not if <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">Penelope</a> has borne a son like you.</p>
         
         <p>But tell me about all this and spare me nothing.</p>
         
         <p>What’s this banqueting, this crowd carousing here?</p>
         
         <p>And what part do you play yourself? Some wedding-feast,</p>
         
         <p>some festival? Hardly a potluck supper, I would say.</p>
         
         <p>How obscenely they lounge and swagger here, look,</p>
         
         <p>gorging in your house. Why, any man of sense</p>
         
         <p>who chanced among them would be outraged,</p>
         
         <p>seeing such behavior.”</p>
         
         <p>Ready <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a> took her up at once: “Well, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">my friend</a>,</p>
         
         <p>seeing you want to probe and press the question,</p>
         
         <p>once this house was rich, no doubt, beyond reproach</p>
         
         <p>when <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">the man you mentioned</a> still lived here, at home.</p>
         
         <p>Now the gods have reversed our fortunes with a vengeance—</p>
         
         <p>wiped that man from the earth like no one else before.</p>
         
         <p>I would never have grieved so much about his death</p>
         
         <p>if he’d gone down with comrades off in <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place001">Troy</a></p>
         
         <p>or died in the arms of loved ones,</p>
         
         <p>once he had wound down the long coil of war.</p>
         
         <p>Then all united <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place018">Achaea</a> would have raised his tomb</p>
         
         <p>and he’d have won his son great fame for years to come.</p>
         
         <p>But now the whirlwinds have ripped him away, no fame for him!</p>
         
         <p>He’s lost and gone now—out of sight, out of mind—and I ...</p>
         
         <p>he’s left me tears and grief. Nor do I rack my heart</p>
         
         <p>and grieve for him alone. No longer. Now the gods</p>
         
         <p>have invented other miseries to plague me.</p>
         
         <p>Listen. <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">All the nobles who rule the islands round about</a>,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place011">Dulichion</a>, and <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place012">Same</a>, and wooded <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place013">Zacynthus</a> too,</p>
         
         <p>and all who lord it in rocky <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a> as well—</p>
         
         <p>down to the last man they court <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">my mother</a>,</p>
         
         <p>they lay waste my house! And <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">mother</a> ...</p>
         
         <p>she neither rejects a marriage she despises</p>
         
         <p>nor can she bear to bring the courting to an end—</p>
         
         <p>while they continue to bleed my household white.</p>
         
         <p>Soon—you wait—they’ll grind me down as well.”</p>
         
         <p>“Shameful!”— brimming with indignation, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Pallas Athena</a> broke out.</p>
         
         <p>“Oh how much you need <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>, gone so long—</p>
         
         <p>how he’d lay hands on all <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">these brazen suitors</a>!</p>
         
         <p>If only he would appear, now,</p>
         
         <p>at his house’s outer gates and take his stand,</p>
         
         <p>armed with his helmet, shield and pair of spears,</p>
         
         <p>as strong as the man I glimpsed that first time</p>
         
         <p>in our own house, drinking wine and reveling there ...</p>
         
         <p>just come in from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place014">Ephyra</a>, visiting <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers025">Ilus</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers026">Mermerus</a>’ son.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> sailed that way, you see, in his swift trim ship,</p>
         
         <p>hunting deadly poison to smear on his arrows’ bronze heads.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers025">Ilus</a> refused—he feared the wrath of the everlasting gods—</p>
         
         <p>but <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">father</a>, so fond of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers025">him</a>, gave <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers025">him</a> all he wanted.</p>
         
         <p>If only that <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> sported with <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">these suitors</a>,</p>
         
         <p>a blood wedding, a quick death would take the lot!</p>
         
         <p>True, but all lies in the lap of the great gods,</p>
         
         <p>whether or not he’ll come and pay them back,</p>
         
         <p>here, in his own house.</p>
         
         <p>But <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">you</a>, I urge you, think how to drive <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">these suitors</a> from your halls.</p>
         
         <p>Come now, listen closely. Take my words to heart.</p>
         
         <p>At daybreak summon the island’s lords to full assembly,</p>
         
         <p>give your orders to all and call the gods to witness:</p>
         
         <p>tell <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">the suitors</a> to scatter, each to his own place.</p>
         
         <p>As for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">your mother</a>, if the spirit moves her to marry,</p>
         
         <p>let her go back to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers027">her father</a>’s house, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers027">a man of power</a>.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">Her</a> kin will arrange the wedding, provide the gifts,</p>
         
         <p>the array that goes with a daughter dearly loved.</p>
         
         <p>For <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">you</a>, I have some good advice, if only you will accept it.</p>
         
         <p>Fit out a ship with twenty oars, the best in sight,</p>
         
         <p>sail in quest of news of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">your long-lost father</a>.</p>
         
         <p>Someone may tell you something</p>
         
         <p>or you may catch a rumor straight from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a>,</p>
         
         <p>rumor that carries news to men like nothing else.</p>
         
         <p>First go down to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place006">Pylos</a>, question <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers028">old King Nestor</a>,</p>
         
         <p>then cross over to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place005">Sparta</a>, to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers029">red-haired Menelaus</a>,</p>
         
         <p>of all <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org005">the bronze-armored Achaeans</a> the last man back.</p>
         
         <p>Now, if you hear <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">your father</a>’s alive and heading home,</p>
         
         <p>hard-pressed as you are, brave out one more year.</p>
         
         <p>If you hear he’s dead, no longer among the living,</p>
         
         <p>then back you come to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">the native land</a> you love.</p>
         
         <p>raise his grave-mound, build his honors high</p>
         
         <p>with the full funeral rites that he deserves—</p>
         
         <p>and give <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">your mother</a> to another husband.</p>
         
         <p>Then, once you’ve sealed those matters, seen them through,</p>
         
         <p>think hard, reach down deep in your heart and soul</p>
         
         <p>for a way to kill <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">these suitors</a> in your house,</p>
         
         <p>by stealth or in open combat.</p>
         
         <p>You must not cling to your boyhood any longer—</p>
         
         <p>it’s time you were a man. Haven’t you heard</p>
         
         <p>what glory <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers013">Prince Orestes</a> won throughout the world</p>
         
         <p>when he killed that <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers011">cunning, murderous Aegisthus</a>,</p>
         
         <p>who’d killed <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers012">his famous father</a>?</p>
         
         <p>And you, my friend— how tall and handsome I see you now—be brave, you too,</p>
         
         <p>so men to come will sing your praises down the years.</p>
         
         <p>But now I must go back to my swift trim ship</p>
         
         <p>and all my shipmates, chafing there, I’m sure,</p>
         
         <p>waiting for my return. It all rests with you.</p>
         
         <p>Take my words to heart.”</p>
         
         <p>“<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Oh stranger</a>,” <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">heedful Telemachus</a> replied, “indeed I will.</p>
         
         <p>You’ve counseled me with so much kindness now,</p>
         
         <p>like a father to a son. I won’t forget a word.</p>
         
         <p>But come, stay longer, keen as you are to sail,</p>
         
         <p>so you can bathe and rest and lift your spirits,</p>
         
         <p>then go back to your ship, delighted with a gift,</p>
         
         <p>a prize of honor, something rare and fine</p>
         
         <p>as a keepsake from myself. The kind of gift</p>
         
         <p>a host will give a stranger, friend to friend.”</p>
         
         <p>Her eyes glinting, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Pallas</a> declined in haste:</p>
         
         <p>“Not now. Don’t hold me here. I long to be on my way.</p>
         
         <p>As for the gift—whatever you’d give in kindness—</p>
         
         <p>save it for my return so I can take it home.</p>
         
         <p>Choose something rare and fine, and a good reward</p>
         
         <p>that gift is going to bring you.”</p>
         
         <p>With that promise, off and away <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a><a href="./Standoff.xhtml">the bright-eyed goddess</a> flew</p>
         
         <p>like a bird in soaring flight</p>
         
         <p>but left <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">his</a> spirit filled with nerve and courage,</p>
         
         <p>charged with <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">his father</a>’s memory more than ever now.</p>
         
         <p>He felt his senses quicken, overwhelmed with wonder—</p>
         
         <p>this was a <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">god</a>, he knew it well and made at once</p>
         
         <p>for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">the suitors</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">a man like a god himself</a>.</p>
         
         <p>Amidst them still <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">the famous bard</a> sang on, and <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">they</a> sat in silence, listening</p>
         
         <p>as <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">he</a> performed <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org005">The Achaeans</a>’ Journey Home from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place001">Troy</a>,</p>
         
         <p>all the blows <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a> doomed <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">them</a> to endure.</p>
         
         <p>And now, from high above in <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">her</a> room and deep in thought,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">she</a> caught <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">his</a> inspired strains ...</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers027">Icarius</a>’ daughter Penelope</a>, wary and reserved,</p>
         
         <p>and down the steep stair from her chamber she descended,</p>
         
         <p>not alone: two of her women followed close behind.</p>
         
         <p>That radiant woman, once she reached <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">her suitors</a>,</p>
         
         <p>drawing her glistening veil across her cheeks,</p>
         
         <p>paused now where a column propped the sturdy roof,</p>
         
         <p>with one of her loyal handmaids stationed either side.</p>
         
         <p>Suddenly, dissolving in tears and bursting through</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">the bard</a>’s inspired voice, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">she</a> cried out, “<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">Phemius</a>!</p>
         
         <p>So many other songs you know to hold us spellbound,</p>
         
         <p>works of the gods and men that singers celebrate.</p>
         
         <p>Sing one of those as you sit beside <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">them</a> here</p>
         
         <p>and they drink their wine in silence.</p>
         
         <p>But break off this song— the unendurable song that always rends the heart inside me
            ...</p>
         
         <p>the unforgettable grief, it wounds me most of all!</p>
         
         <p>How I long for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">my husband</a>—alive in memory, always, </p>
         
         <p>that great man whose fame resounds through <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place015">Hellas</a></p>
         
         <p>right to the depths of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place016">Argos</a>!”</p>
         
         <p>“Why, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">mother</a>,” poised <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a> put in sharply, “why deny</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">our devoted bard</a> the chance to entertain us</p>
         
         <p>any way the spirit stirs him on?</p>
         
         <p>Bards are not to blame—</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a> is to blame. He deals to each and every</p>
         
         <p>laborer on this earth whatever doom he pleases.</p>
         
         <p>Why fault the bard if he sings the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org009">Argives</a>’ harsh fate?</p>
         
         <p>It’s always the latest song, the one that echoes last</p>
         
         <p>in the listeners’ ears, that people praise the most.</p>
         
         <p>Courage, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">mother</a>. Harden your heart, and listen.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> was scarcely the only one, you know,</p>
         
         <p>whose journey home was blotted out at <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place001">Troy</a>.</p>
         
         <p>Others, so many others, died there too.</p>
         
         <p>So, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">mother</a>, go back to your quarters. Tend to your own tasks,</p>
         
         <p>the distaff and the loom, and keep the women</p>
         
         <p>working hard as well. As for giving orders,</p>
         
         <p>men will see to that, but I most of all:</p>
         
         <p>I hold the reins of power in this house.”</p>
         
         <p>Astonished, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">she</a> withdrew to her own room. She took to heart</p>
         
         <p>the clear good sense in what <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">her son</a> had said.</p>
         
         <p>Climbing up to the lofty chamber with her women,</p>
         
         <p>she fell to weeping for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">her beloved husband</a>,</p>
         
         <p>till <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">watchful Athena</a> sealed <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">her</a> eyes with welcome sleep.</p>
         
         <p>But <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">the suitors</a> broke into uproar through the shadowed</p>
         
         <p>halls, all of them lifting prayers to lie beside <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">her</a>, share her bed,</p>
         
         <p>until <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">discreet Telemachus</a> took command: “<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">You suitors</a></p>
         
         <p>who plague <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">my mother</a>, you, you insolent, overweening ...</p>
         
         <p>for this evening let us dine and take our pleasure,</p>
         
         <p>no more shouting now. What a fine thing it is</p>
         
         <p>to listen to <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">such a bard as we have here</a>—</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers022">the man sings like a god</a>.</p>
         
         <p>But at first light we all march forth to assembly, take our seats</p>
         
         <p>so I can give my orders and say to you straight out:</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml">You</a> must leave my palace! See to your feasting elsewhere,</p>
         
         <p>devour your own possessions, house to house by turns.</p>
         
         <p>But if you decide the fare is better, richer here,</p>
         
         <p>destroying one man’s goods and going scot-free,</p>
         
         <p>all right then, carve away!</p>
         
         <p>But I’ll cry out to the everlasting gods in hopes</p>
         
         <p>that <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a> will pay you back with a vengeance—all of you</p>
         
         <p>destroyed in my house while I go scot-free myself!”</p>
         
         <p>So <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a> declared. And they all bit their lips,</p>
         
         <p>amazed <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">the prince</a> could speak with so much daring.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers031"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers030">Eupithes</a>’ son</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers031">Antinous</a> broke their silence:</p>
         
         <p>“Well, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a>, only the gods could teach you</p>
         
         <p>to sound so high and mighty! Such brave talk.</p>
         
         <p>I pray that <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a> will never make you king of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a>,</p>
         
         <p>though <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">your father</a>’s crown is no doubt <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">yours</a> by birth.”</p>
         
         <p>But <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">cool-headed Telemachus</a> countered firmly:</p>
         
         <p>“<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers031">Antinous</a>, even though my words may offend you,</p>
         
         <p>I’d be happy to take the crown if <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers006">Zeus</a> presents it.</p>
         
         <p>You think that nothing worse could befall a man?</p>
         
         <p>It’s really not so bad to be a king. All at once</p>
         
         <p>your palace grows in wealth, your honors grow as well.</p>
         
         <p>But there are hosts of other <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org005">Achaean princes,</a> look—</p>
         
         <p>young and old, crowds of them on <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">our island here</a>—</p>
         
         <p>and any one of the lot might hold the throne,</p>
         
         <p>now great <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">Odysseus</a> is dead ...</p>
         
         <p>But I’ll be lord of my own house and servants,</p>
         
         <p>all that <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">King Odysseus</a> won for me by force.”</p>
         
         <p>And now <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers032">Eurymachus</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers033">Polybus</a>’ son</a>, stepped in:</p>
         
         <p>“Surely this must lie in the gods’ lap, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a>—</p>
         
         <p>which <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org005">Achaean</a> will lord it over <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">seagirt Ithaca</a>.</p>
         
         <p>Do hold on to your own possessions, rule your house.</p>
         
         <p>God forbid that anyone tear your holdings from your hands</p>
         
         <p>while men still live in <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place002">Ithaca</a>.</p>
         
         <p>But about <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">your guest</a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">dear boy</a>, I have some questions. Where does <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">he</a> come from?</p>
         
         <p>Where’s his country, his birth, his father’s old estates?</p>
         
         <p>Did he bring some news of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">your father, his return</a>?</p>
         
         <p>Or did <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">he</a> come on business of his own?</p>
         
         <p>How he leapt to his feet and off he went!</p>
         
         <p>No waiting around for proper introductions.</p>
         
         <p>And no mean man, not by the looks of him, I’d say.”</p>
         
         <p>“<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers032">Eurymachus</a>,” <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a> answered shrewdly,</p>
         
         <p>“clearly <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers003">my father</a>’s journey home is lost forever.</p>
         
         <p>I no longer trust in rumors—rumors from the blue—</p>
         
         <p>nor bother with any prophecy, when <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers007">mother</a> calls</p>
         
         <p>some wizard into the house to ask him questions.</p>
         
         <p>As for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">the stranger</a> though,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">the man’s</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">an old family friend</a>, from <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#place017">Taphos</a>,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers021"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers023">wise <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers023">Anchialus</a>’</a> son</a>. He says his name is <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers021">Mentes</a>,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers021">lord of the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org001">Taphian men</a></a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml">who love their oars.”</a></p>
         
         <p>So <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">he</a> said but deep in his mind he knew <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">the immortal goddess</a>.</p>
         
         <p>Now <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#org002">the suitors</a> turned to dance and song,</p>
         
         <p>to the lovely beat and sway,</p>
         
         <p>waiting for dusk to come upon them there ...</p>
         
         <p>and the dark night came upon them, lost in pleasure.</p>
         
         <p>Finally, to bed. Each to his own house.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">Telemachus</a>, off to his bedroom built in the fine courtyard—</p>
         
         <p>a commanding, lofty room set well apart—</p>
         
         <p>retired too, his spirit swarming with misgivings.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">His devoted nurse</a> attended him, bearing a glowing torch,</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">Eurycleia</a> <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">the daughter of <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers035">Ops</a></a>, <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers035"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers036">Pisenor</a>’s son</a>.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers024">Laertes</a> had paid a price for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">the woman</a> years ago,</p>
         
         <p>still in the bloom of youth. <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers024">He</a> traded twenty oxen,</p>
         
         <p>honored <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">her</a> on a par with <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers037">his own loyal wife</a> at home</p>
         
         <p>but fearing <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers037">the queen</a>’s anger, never shared <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">her</a> bed.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">She</a> was <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002"><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers024">his</a>grandson</a>’s escort now and bore a torch,</p>
         
         <p>for <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">she</a> was the one of all the maids who loved</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">the prince</a> the most—<a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">she</a>’d nursed him as a baby.</p>
         
         <p><a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers002">He</a> spread the doors of his snug, well-made room,</p>
         
         <p>sat down on the bed and pulled his soft shirt off,</p>
         
         <p>tossed it into the <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers034">old woman</a>’s conscientious hands,</p>
         
         <p>and after folding it neatly, patting it smooth,</p>
         
         <p>she hung it up on a peg beside his corded bed,</p>
         
         <p>then padded from the bedroom,</p>
         
         <p>drawing the door shut with the silver hook,</p>
         
         <p>sliding the doorbolt home with its rawhide strap.</p>
         
         <p>There all night long, wrapped in a sheep’s warm fleece,</p>
         
         <p>he weighed in his mind the course <a href="./Standoff.xhtml#pers001">Athena</a> charted.</p>
         </div>
      </body>
   </html>